docs: update datasets tutorial (#1569)
lightly-ai/lightly: docs/source/tutorials/structure_your_input.rst

Tutorial 1: Structure Your Input
================================

The modern-day open-source ecosystem has changed a lot over the years, and there are now
many viable options for data pipelining. The `torchvision.data <https://pytorch.org/vision/main/datasets.html>`_ submodule provides a robust implementation for most use cases,
and the `HuggingFace Hub <https://hf.co>`_ has emerged as a growing collection of datasets that span a variety of domains and tasks.
It you want to use your own data, the ability to quickly create datasets and dataloaders is of prime importance.

> In this blog post, we will provide a brief overview of the `LightlyDataset <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.data.html#lightly.data.dataset.LightlyDataset>`_

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we will provide a brief overview of the `LightlyDataset <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.data.html#lightly.data.dataset.LightlyDataset>`_
```

and go through examples of using datasets from various open-source libraries such as PyTorch and

> Huggingface with the Lightly SSL open-source package. We will also look into how we can create dataloaders

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Huggingface with Lightly SSL. We will also look into how we can create dataloaders
```

for video tasks while incorporating weak labels.

> Native LightlyDataset format
> ----------------------------

Reviewer: ```suggestion
LightlyDataset
--------------
```

The LightlyDataset class aims to provide a uniform data interface for all models and functions in the Lightly SSL package.

> It allows us to create both Image and Video dataset classes with or without labels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It allows us to create both image and video dataset classes with or without labels.
```

Supported File Types
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Since Lightly SSL uses `Pillow <https://github.com/python-pillow/Pillow>`_
for image loading, it supports all the image formats supported by Pillow.

- .jpg, .png, .tiff and 
  `many more <https://pillow.readthedocs.io/en/stable/handbook/image-file-formats.html>`_

> To load videos directly, Lightly SSL uses
> `torchvision <https://github.com/pytorch/vision>`_ and
> `PyAV <https://github.com/PyAV-Org/PyAV>`_. The following formats are supported.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Lightly SSL uses
`torchvision <https://github.com/pytorch/vision>`_ and
`PyAV <https://github.com/PyAV-Org/PyAV>`_ for video loading. The following formats are supported.
```

- .mov, .mp4 and .avi

Unlabeled Image Datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Creating an Unlabeled Image Dataset is the simplest and the most common use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Creating an unlabeled image dataset is the simplest and the most common use case.
```

> Assuming all images are in a single directory, you can simply pass in the path to the directory containing all the images, viz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming all images are in a single directory, you can simply pass in the path to the directory containing all the images.
```

.. code-block:: python

    from lightly.data import LightlyDataset

>     dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='image_dir/')

Reviewer: I would also include a transform here as we show transforms also for pytorch and hugging face.

Reviewer: This hasn't been addressed yet

.. note::

    Internally each image will get assigned a default label of 0

Labeled Image Datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

If you have (weak) labels for your images and if each label has its directory,
then you can simply pass in the path to the parent directory,

> and the dataset class will assign each image its subdirectory as label., viz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and the dataset class will assign each image its subdirectory as label.
```

Tutorial 1: Structure Your Input
================================

The modern-day open-source ecosystem has changed a lot over the years, and there are now
many viable options for data pipelining. For experimentation purposes,

> the `torchvision.data <https://pytorch.org/vision/main/datasets.html>`_ submodule provides a robust implementation for most use cases,

Author: It seems like there was some miscommunication here. I didn't mean to convey that torchvision is "experimental", but rather that torchvision hosts a lot of smaller datasets which can be loaded on-device for verifying training pipelines on smaller datasets.

and the `HuggingFace Hub <https://hf.co>`_ has emerged as a growing collection of datasets that span a variety of domains and tasks.

> When you have your own data in memory, the ability to quickly create datasets and dataloaders is of prime importance.

Author: Thanks, makes sense.

it will produce a representation that is invariant to the color information [1]_.

We can use off the shelf augmentations from libraries like `torchvision transforms <https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/transforms.html>`_
and `albumentations <https://albumentations.ai/docs/>`_ or the ones offered by Lightly SSL's
`transforms <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.transforms.html>`_ submodule while creating our datasets.

.. code-block:: python

    import albumentations as A
    import torchvision.transforms as T
    from albumentations.pytorch import ToTensorV2

    from lightly.data import LightlyDataset

    ## Torchvision Transforms
    torchvision_transform = T.Compose(
        [
            T.RandomHorizontalFlip(),
            T.ToTensor(),
        ]
    )

    ## Albumentation Transforms
    albumentation_transform = A.Compose(
        [
            A.CenterCrop(height=128, width=128),
            A.Normalize(mean=(0.485, 0.456, 0.406), std=(0.229, 0.224, 0.225)),
            ToTensorV2(),
        ]
    )

    ## Lightly Transforms
    lightly_transform = SimCLRTransform()

> 
>     dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir="image_dir/", transform=torchvision_transform)

Reviewer: Suggestion to make it more evident that datasets/transforms are interchangeable:

```suggestion
    
    # Datasets and transforms can be mixed and matched together:
    dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir="image_dir/", transform=torchvision_transform)
    dataset = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10("datasets/cifar10", transform=lightly_transform)
```

        ...
        +-- img-N10.jpg

.. code-block:: python

   from lightly.data import LightlyDataset

>    labeled_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='labeled_images_dir/')

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   labeled_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='labeled_image_dir/')
```

Please also rename the `data/` dir in the example directory structure to `labeled_image_dir`

Video Datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The Lightly SSL package also has native support for videos (`.mov`, `.mp4`, and `.avi` file extensions are supported),
without having to extract the frames first. This can save a lot of disk space as video files are
typically strongly compressed. No matter if your videos are in one flat directory or distributed across subdirectories,

> you can simply pass the path into the LightlyDataset constructor.

Reviewer: Please rename `data/` in example directory structure to `video_dir/`

        +-- my_video_3.avi
        +-- my_video_4.avi

.. code-block:: python

   from lightly.data import LightlyDataset

   video_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='video_dir/')

The dataset assigns each video frame its video as label.

.. note::

>    To use video-specific features of Lightly SSL download the necessary extra dependencies `pip install lightly"[video]"`. Furthermore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   To use video-specific features of Lightly SSL download the necessary extra dependencies `pip install "lightly[video]"`. Furthermore,
```

   randomly accessing video frames is slower compared to accessing the extracted frames on disk. However,
   by working directly on video files, one can save a lot of disk space because the frames do not have to
   be extracted beforehand.

PyTorch Datasets
----------------

You can also use native `torchvision <https://pytorch.org/vision/main/datasets.html>`_ datasets with Lightly SSL directly.

> Just create a dataset as you normally would and apply transforms for greater control over the dataloader. For example, BYOL
> (Bootstrap your own element) expects two views of an input image. To achieve this, we can use the `BYOLTransform`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just create a dataset as you normally would and apply transforms for greater control over the dataloader. For example, the BYOL self-supervised learning method expects two views of an input image. To achieve this, we can use the `BYOLTransform`
```

You could also make BYOL link to the BYOL docs.

> while creating the dataset instance, which will lead to the dataloader returning two views per batch, viz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while creating the dataset instance, which will lead to the dataloader returning two views per batch.
```

.. code-block:: python

   import torchvision

>    from lightly.transforms.byol_transform import (

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   from lightly.transforms import (
```

       BYOLTransform,
       BYOLView1Transform,
       BYOLView2Transform,
   )

   transform = BYOLTransform(
       view_1_transform=BYOLView1Transform(input_size=32, gaussian_blur=0.0),
       view_2_transform=BYOLView2Transform(input_size=32, gaussian_blur=0.0),

>    )

Reviewer: BYOL is maybe not a great example as it requires more boilerplate code for creating the transformer compared to SimCLR. Consider switching to SimCLR

   dataset = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10(
       "datasets/cifar10", download=True, transform=transform
   )

   dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(
       dataset,
       batch_size=256,
       shuffle=True,
       drop_last=True,
       num_workers=8,
   )

   # ...
   for batch in dataloader:
       x0, x1 = batch[0]

>        # ...

Reviewer: I don't think this part is necessary, we also don't show it for LightlyDataset

> HuggingFace Datasets

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hugging Face Datasets
```

Please also correct in other places on this page

--------------------

> To use a dataset from the huggingface hub 🤗, we can simply apply the desired transformations using the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use a dataset from the Hugging Face Hub 🤗, we can simply apply the desired transformations using the 
```

`set_transform <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.20.0/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.set_transform>`_
helper method and then create a native PyTorch dataloader.

.. code-block:: python

    import torch
    from typing import Any
    from datasets import load_dataset
    from lightly.transforms import SimCLRTransform

>     base = load_dataset("uoft-cs/cifar10", trust_remote_code=True)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dataset = load_dataset("uoft-cs/cifar10", trust_remote_code=True)
```

    ## Use pre-defined set of transformations from Lightly SSL
    transform = SimCLRTransform()

>     def apply_transform(batch: dict[str, Any], transform=transform)-> Dict[str, Any]:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    def apply_transform(batch: Dict[str, Any])-> Dict[str, Any]:
```
Also make sure to import `Dict` from typing

        """
        Applies the given transform on all elements of batch["image"].
        """
        assert "image" in example_batch, "batch must contain key 'image'"
        batch["image"] = [transform(img.convert("RGB")) for img in batch["image"]]
        return batch

>     base.set_transform(apply_transform)
>     hf_dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(base["train"])

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    dataset.set_transform(apply_transform)
    dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(dataset["train"])
```

Image Augmentations
-------------------

Many SSL methods leverage image augmentations to better learn invariances in the training process. For example,
by using different crops of a given image, the SSL model will be trained to produce a representation
that is invariant to these different crops. When using a operation such as grayscale or colorjitter as augmentation,
it will produce a representation that is invariant to the color information [1]_.

> We can use off the shelf augmentations from libraries like `torchvision transforms <https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/transforms.html>`_
> and `albumentations <https://albumentations.ai/docs/>`_ or the ones offered by Lightly SSL's
> `transforms <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.transforms.html>`_ submodule while creating our datasets, viz.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We can use off the shelf augmentations from libraries like `torchvision transforms <https://pytorch.org/vision/stable/transforms.html>`_
and `albumentations <https://albumentations.ai/docs/>`_ or the ones offered by Lightly SSL's
`transforms <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.transforms.html>`_ submodule while creating our datasets.
```

.. code-block:: python

    import albumentations as A
    import torchvision.transforms as T
    from albumentations.pytorch import ToTensorV2

    ## Torchvision Transforms

>     torchvision_transforms = T.Compose(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    torchvision_transform = T.Compose(
```

        [
            T.RandomHorizontalFlip(),
            T.ToTensor(),
        ]
    )

    ## Albumentation Transforms

>     albumentation_transforms = A.Compose(

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    albumentation_transform = A.Compose(
```

        [
            A.CenterCrop(height=128, width=128),
            A.Normalize(mean=(0.485, 0.456, 0.406), std=(0.229, 0.224, 0.225)),
            ToTensorV2(),
        ]
    )

    ## Lightly Transforms
    lightly_transform = SimCLRTransform()

.. note::

>    You can also create your own augmentations, for more details please refer to :ref:`lightly-custom-augmentation-5` 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   You can also create your own SSL augmentations, for more details please refer to :ref:`lightly-custom-augmentation-5` 
```

.. code-block:: python

    ## Applying Augmentations to a Unlabelled Images Dataset
    torchvision_aug_image_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='image_dir/', transform=torchvision_transforms)
    albumentations_aug_image_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='image_dir/', transform=albumentation_transforms)
    lightly_aug_image_dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir='image_dir/', transform=lightly_transforms)

    ## Similarly for other data formats (Labeled Image Datasets and Video Datasets)

Using Transforms for PyTorch Datasets
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Similar to native `LightlyDataset`'s we can also pass the transforms while constructing a `LightlyDataset` from a PyTorch Dataset, viz.

.. code-block:: python

    import torchvision

    base = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10(root="data/torchvision/", download=True)

    torchvision_aug_dataset = LightlyDataset.from_torch_dataset(
        base, transform=torchvision_transforms
    )
    albumentation_aug_dataset = LightlyDataset.from_torch_dataset(
        base, transform=albumentation_transforms
    )
    lightly_aug_dataset = LightlyDataset.from_torch_dataset(
        base, transform=lightly_transform

>     )

Reviewer: I think these two sections are a bit overkill as they are quite verbose but do not add much new information. I would replace them and just mention that we can use the transforms for any dataset as shown previously and give a minimal example like:
```
dataset = LightlyDataset(input_dir="image_dir/", transform=torchvision_transform)
# or
dataset = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10("datasets/cifar10", download=True, transform=albumentations_transform)
```

Conclusion
----------

> In this blogpost, we went through examples of using various open-source packages to create datasets and dataloaders with Lightly SSL,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, we went through examples of using various open-source packages to create datasets and dataloaders with Lightly SSL,
```

   be extracted beforehand.

PyTorch Datasets
----------------

The Lightly SSL package has helper functions that allow us to use any dataset from PyTorch or torchvision directly within the ecosystem. For example,
to use the CIFAR10 dataset from torchvision we can simply use the
`from_torch_dataset() <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.data.html#lightly.data.dataset.LightlyDataset.from_torch_dataset>`_
helper method of the `LightlyDataset <https://docs.lightly.ai/self-supervised-learning/lightly.data.html#lightly.data.dataset.LightlyDataset>`_ class.

.. code-block:: python

   import torchvision
   from lightly.data import LightlyDataset

   base = torchvision.datasets.CIFAR10(root = "./data", download = True)
   torch_dataset = LightlyDataset.from_torch_dataset(base)

HuggingFace Datasets
--------------------

To use a dataset from the huggingface hub 🤗, we can simply apply the desired transformations using the 
`set_transform <https://huggingface.co/docs/datasets/v2.20.0/en/package_reference/main_classes#datasets.Dataset.set_transform>`_
helper method and then create a native PyTorch dataloader.

.. code-block:: python

>     import torch
>     from datasets import load_dataset
>     from lightly.transforms import SimCLRTransform
> 
>     base = load_dataset("uoft-cs/cifar10", trust_remote_code=True)
> 
>     ## Use pre-defined set of transformations from Lightly SSL
>     transform = SimCLRTransform()
> 
>     def apply_transform(example_batch, transform=transform):
>         """
>         Apply the given transform across a batch. To be used in a 'map' like manner
> 
>         Args:
>           example_batch (Dict): a batch of data, should contain the key 'image'
>           tranform (Callable): image transformations to be performed
> 
>         Returns:
>           updated batch with transformations applied to the image
>         """
> 
>         assert "image" in example_batch.keys(), "batch should be of type Dict[str, Any] with a key 'image'"
> 
>         example_batch["image"] = [
>             transform(image.convert("RGB")) for image in example_batch["image"]
>         ]
>         return example_batch
> 
>     base.set_transform(apply_transform)
> 
>     hf_dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(base["train"])

Reviewer 2: I would make the function shorter.
```suggestion
    import torch
    from typing import Any
    from datasets import load_dataset
    from lightly.transforms import SimCLRTransform

    base = load_dataset("uoft-cs/cifar10", trust_remote_code=True)

    ## Use pre-defined set of transformations from Lightly SSL
    transform = SimCLRTransform()

    def apply_transform(batch: dict[str, Any], transform=transform)-> Dict[str, Any]:
        """
        Applies the given transform on all elements of batch["image"].
        """
        assert "image" in example_batch, "batch must contain key 'image'"
        batch["image"] = [transform(img.convert("RGB")) for img in batch["image"]]
        return batch

    base.set_transform(apply_transform)

    hf_dataloader = torch.utils.data.DataLoader(base["train"])
```

Author: Thank you, that is much cleaner 🧼
